---
layout: post
title: Current Efforts and Models
date: 2018-10-08
---

## 
There are several methods that have been piloted in order to include nonbinary Jews in Hebrew ritual elements, such as Kehilat Hadar’s nonbinary guidelines[13] that recommend the use of נָא לֲעַמֹד in place of תעמוֹד or יעמוֹד. This practice was written about in Tablet Magazine as well. However, this use of the infinitive can only be generalized to so many circumstances. Another Jewish community, of the summer camp Moshava in the Habonim Dror North America youth movement, had the need for inclusive language presented by a nonbinary camper. The camp taught all of its staff and campers how to change their language and now use -ol as a singular ending and -imot as a plural ending[14]. However, Hebrew is used often as assorted, isolated nouns in mostly English sentences instead of as a coherent single spoken tongue at this camp and as such the systemics of implementation were not fully developed. Another precedent that has been attempted[15], similar to the combination idea of Moshava’s -imot, is the use of אתמן to supplement אתם and אתן. Again, this is an incredible step but lacks broader language systematics and application. Another article recommends utilizing existing precedents of ungendered language, such as בא לי; however, this again runs into the issue of larger extrapolation[16].
Orit Bershtling illustrates the challenges, limitations, and advantages of speaking about transgender experiences in a binarily gendered language in a chapter of the book Queer Excursions: Retheorizing Binaries in Language, Gender, and Sexuality[17].  She interviews genderqueer folks about their gender and use of Hebrew in that context. Some of the interviewees, who speak Hebrew as their mother tongue, will switch back and forth in terms of gendered terminology but maintain a single gender for conjugating verbs, while others will self-refer by alternating gender in each sentence. However, this can become cumbersome and confusing in terms of subject of the sentence, especially because of the convention in Hebrew to omit pronouns due to the gendered nature of verbs.
Bershtling’s essay takes an interesting stand: the binary restrictions of Hebrew allow for amazing kinds of transgression, implicit and explicit, that could not occur in more lenient languages.
There are Spanish speakers taking advantage of this loophole, in a manner of speaking, by conjugating nouns with an “x” instead of the masculine “o” or feminine “a” (for example, “Latinx” instead of “Latino” or “Latina”; however, some problems have been voiced by speakers who cannot pronounce the “x”, as well as by disability advocates who have encountered problems with assistive text-vocalizing technologies that cannot process the “x”. Thus, it is becoming more common to see “e” as the alternate vowel sound, which works well because of the strict gendered rules of “o/a” seen throughout the language (ex.: “Latine” instead of “Latinx)[18].
